Fluids: Creating Your First Fluid (#539)
FabricMC/fabric-docs: develop/fluids/first-fluid.md

---
title: Creating Your First Fluid
description: Learn how to create your first custom fluid in Minecraft.
authors:
  - AlexiyOrlov
  - cassiancc
  - CelDaemon
  - Clomclem
  - comp500
  - Daomephsta
  - Earthcomputer
  - florensie
  - Fusion-Flux
  - InfinityChances
  - MaxURhino
  - SolidBlock-cn
  - SuperSoupr
  - Virtuoel
  - UpcraftLP
  - AlbanischeWurst
authors-nogithub:
  - alfiejfs
  - salvopelux
---

<!---->

::: info PREREQUISITES

You must first understand how to [create a block](../blocks/first-block) and how to [create an item](../items/first-item).

:::

> This example will cover the creation of an acid fluid that hurts and weakens entities that stand inside of it. To do this, we'll be covering the creation of two fluid instances for the source and fluid states, a liquid block, and a bucket item. A second article also covers the mixins needed to add your own fog type.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This example will cover the creation of an acid fluid that hurts and weakens entities that stand inside of it. To do this, we'll need two fluid instances for the source and fluid states, a liquid block, and a bucket item.
```

Don't forget that items require a translation, [texture](../items/first-item#adding-a-texture), [model](../items/first-item#adding-a-model), and [client item](../items/first-item#creating-the-client-item) with the name `acid_bucket` in order to render correctly. An example texture is provided below.

<DownloadEntry visualURL="/assets/develop/fluids/acid_bucket.png" downloadURL="/assets/develop/fluids/acid_bucket_small.png">Texture</DownloadEntry>

It's also recommended to add your mod's bucket to the `ConventionalItemTags.BUCKET` item tag so that other mods can handle it appropriately, either [manually](#tagging) or through [data generation](../data-generation/tags).

## Tagging Your Fluids {#tagging}

::: info

Users of [data generation](../data-generation/tags) may wish to register tags via `FabricTagProvider.FluidTagProvider`, rather than writing them by hand.

:::

Because a fluid is considered two separate blocks in its flowing and still states, a tag is often used to check for both states together. We'll create a fluid tag in `data/example-mod/tags/fluid/acid.json`:

> @[code transclude](@/reference/latest/src/main/generated/data/example-mod/tags/fluid/acid.json)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<<< @/reference/latest/src/main/generated/data/example-mod/tags/fluid/acid.json
```

time to get used to this! (PS: no need to change this PR, I'll handle it within #541)

::: tip

Minecraft also provider other tags to control the behavior of fluids:

- If you need your mod's fluid to behave like water (absorbed by sponges, swimmable...), considering adding it to the `minecraft:water` fluid tag
- If you need it to behave like lava (swimmable by Striders/Ghasts, slows entities...), consider adding it to the `minecraft:lava` fluid tag

> If you only need _some_ of those things, you may wish to use mixins to finely control the behavior.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- If you only need _some_ of those things, you may wish to use mixins to finely control the behavior.
```

:::

## Transparency and Textures {#transparency-and-textures}

To texture your fluid, you should use Fabric API's `FluidRenderHandlerRegistry`. We'll also use the `BlockRenderLayerMap` to set the `ChunkSectionLayer` to transparent, so you can see through the fluid. For more information, see the docs on [Transparency and Tinting](../blocks/transparency-and-tinting).

::: tip

For simplicity, this demo uses the water texture `Identifier`s provided by Fabric API, but you can replace those with an `Identifier` that points to your own texture in the format `minecraft:block/water_still`.

:::

Add the following lines to your `ClientModInitializer` to create a `SimpleFluidRenderHandler`, that takes in two `Identifier`s for the textures—one for the still source and one for the flowing fluid—and an integer for the color to tint it with.

@[code transcludeWith=:::fluid_texture](@/reference/latest/src/client/java/com/example/docs/appearance/ExampleModAppearanceClient.java)

At this point, we have all we need to see the Acid in-game! You can use `setblock` or the Acid Bucket item to place acid in the world.

![A screenshot of a green acid fluid in the world](/assets/develop/fluids/acid.png)

> If you submerge yourself in acid, you will notice that the fog does not render correctly yet. For this, read the following article on [Adding Fog to Your Fluid](./fluid-fog).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

how does it look like without the fog code?

Reviewer 2: No fog is present. We can add the water fog by tagging the fluid as water, which I think would be fine for this demo.
<img width="1704" height="980" alt="image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/ac67a548-93e1-48db-8e3c-edc6e2bab0c0" />

Reviewer: What if we gave the player nausea? that way they won't notice the missing fog /hj

Reviewer 2: We could, though I'd probably just tag it anyway. This is fairly common practice on Fabric.
https://github.com/Fabricators-of-Create/Create/blob/mc1.20.1/fabric/dev/src/generated/resources/data/minecraft/tags/fluids/water.json

---
title: Creating Your First Fluid
description: Learn how to create your first custom fluid in Minecraft.
authors:
  - AlexiyOrlov
  - cassiancc
  - CelDaemon
  - Clomclem
  - comp500
  - Daomephsta
  - Earthcomputer
  - florensie
  - Fusion-Flux
  - InfinityChances
  - MaxURhino
  - SolidBlock-cn
  - SuperSoupr
  - Virtuoel
  - UpcraftLP

>   - AlbanischeWurst

Reviewer: alphabet?

authors-nogithub:
  - alfiejfs
  - salvopelux
---

<!---->

::: info PREREQUISITES

> You must first understand [how to create an block](../blocks/first-block) and [how to create an item](../items/first-item).

Reviewer 3: `an block` is wrong here, should be `a block`. 
Additionally the link looks better as `create a block` and`create an item`, excluding `how to` (at least in my opinion.

:::

> This example will cover the creation of an Acid fluid that hurts and weakens entities that stand inside of it.

Reviewer 3: "Acid" should probably not be capitalised, unless "fluid" will also be capitalised.
I, personally, wouldn't capitalise any.

> ## Creating the Fluid Class {#creating-the-fluid-class}

Reviewer: I felt lost. this should at least give the reader a general idea of what we're gonna do: create a fluid class, with two inner classes for the fluid states (source and flowing). it's a lot of code to process at once

> The baseline class for fluids is the `FlowingFluid` class. We'll start by creating an abstract class, in this case `AcidFluid`, that extends `FlowingFluid`, overriding all the methods that will be shared by the source and the flowing fluid:

Reviewer 3: Personally, I find this sentence:
_We'll start by creating an abstract class, in this case AcidFluid, that extends FlowingFluid, overriding all the methods that will be shared by the source and the flowing fluid:_
a little hard to follow.

@[code transcludeWith=:::abstractFluid](@/reference/latest/src/main/java/com/example/docs/fluid/custom/AcidFluid.java)

Inside `AcidFluid`, we'll create two subclasses for the `Source` and `Flowing` fluids.

@[code transcludeWith=:::fluidSubclasses](@/reference/latest/src/main/java/com/example/docs/fluid/custom/AcidFluid.java)

### Registering Fluids {#registering-fluids}

> Next, you would need to create a class, called `ModFluids`, that would register all the fluid instances.

Reviewer 3: Still in the subjunctive, it would sound more consistent, were this also phrased as first person plural in the simple future like "We'll".
Alternatively rephrase "We'll" to a different adress.

@[code transcludeWith=:::register](@/reference/latest/src/main/java/com/example/docs/fluid/ModFluids.java)

Just like with blocks, you need to ensure that the class is loaded so that all static fields containing your fluid instances are initialized.

> You can do this by creating a dummy `initialize` method, which can be called in your [mod's initializer](../getting-started/project-structure#entrypoints) to trigger the static initialization.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Just like with blocks, you need to ensure that the class is loaded so that all static fields containing your fluid instances are initialized. You can do this by creating a dummy `initialize` method, which can be called in your [mod's initializer](../getting-started/project-structure#entrypoints) to trigger the static initialization.
```

> Now, go back to the `AcidFluid` class, and add these methods to associate the registered fluid instances with this fluid:

Reviewer: is it not weird to be tangling the classes like this? or is this normal

Reviewer 2: This is normal. Fluids are awful.

@[code transcludeWith=:::sources](@/reference/latest/src/main/java/com/example/docs/fluid/custom/AcidFluid.java)

> The fluid now has registered the source and the flowing fluid. We just need a bucket to complete the acid fluid, and a legacy block for it.

Reviewer 3: Might sound better like:
_We just need a bucket and a legacy block to complete the acid fluid._
This avoids awkward phrasing such as "and a legacy block for it" but still leaves "to **complete** the [...] fluid".
Condsider rewording that as well.

> ### Registering Fluid Blocks {#fluid-blocks}

Reviewer: Should these be h2?

Reviewer 2: I'm of two minds on that - I consider this part of the work of defining the fluid class.

> Now, let's add a legacy block for our fluid. These are used for some behaviour if your fluid needs to exist in the world - one example would be the `setblock` command. Switch to your `ModBlocks` class and create the following block. If you do not yet have a `ModBlocks` class, follow the docs for [Creating Your First Block](../blocks/first-block).

Reviewer 3: _These are used for some behaviour if your fluid needs to exist in the world_ 
The phrasing of "if your fluid needs to exist in the world" is also slightly awkward.
It will be used for that behavior no matter what, but it's just *needed* if you want it to exist in the world.

> Now, let's add a legacy block for our fluid. Legacy blocks are used for some behaviour in the world - one example would be the `setblock` command, so you'll need to define one for the fluid to exist in the world. Switch to your `ModBlocks` class and register the following `LiquidBlock`. If you do not yet have a `ModBlocks` class, follow the docs for [Creating Your First Block](../blocks/first-block).

Reviewer: some references to "legacy block" need updating

```suggestion
Let's now add a liquid block for our fluid. This is needed by some commands like `setblock`, so your fluid can exist in the world. If you haven't done so yet, you should take a look at [how to create your first block](../blocks/first-block).

Open your `ModBlocks` class and register this following `LiquidBlock`:
```

@[code transcludeWith=:::acid](@/reference/latest/src/main/java/com/example/docs/block/ModBlocks.java)

### Registering Buckets {#buckets}

> Now, let's add the bucket for acid. Switch to your `ModItems` class and create the following item. If you do not yet have a `ModItems` class, follow the docs for [Creating Your First Item](../items/first-item).

Reviewer 3: "Now, let's add the bucket for acid" 
sounds better as "Now, let's add a Bucket of Acid" or similar.
It might also be advice to fixate on having a `ModItems` class, it might be better to point to more general advice about creating an Item.

> Now, let's add a Bucket of Acid. Switch to your `ModItems` class and register the following `BucketItem`. If you do not yet have a `ModItems` class, follow the docs for [Creating Your First Item](../items/first-item).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Fluids in Minecraft usually go in buckets, so let's see how we can add an item for a Bucket of Acid. If you haven't done so yet, you should take a look at [how to create your first item](../items/first-item).

Open your `ModItems` class and register this following `BucketItem`:
```

@[code transcludeWith=:::acid_bucket](@/reference/latest/src/main/java/com/example/docs/item/ModItems.java)

Then, override this method in `AcidFluid` to associate your bucket with the fluid:

@[code transcludeWith=:::bucket](@/reference/latest/src/main/java/com/example/docs/fluid/custom/AcidFluid.java)

> Don't forget that items require a translation, [texture](../first-item#adding-a-texture), [model](../first-item#adding-a-model), and [client item](<(../first-item#creating-the-client-item)>) with the name `acid_bucket` in order to render correctly. An example texture is provided below.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Don't forget that items require a translation, [texture](../items/first-item#adding-a-texture), [model](../items/first-item#adding-a-model), and [client item](../items/first-item#creating-the-client-item) with the name `acid_bucket` in order to render correctly. An example texture is provided below.
```

I see why you didn't link to `[translation](../items/first-item#naming-the-item)`. Maybe that section in the First Item page should mention datagen?

<DownloadEntry visualURL="/assets/develop/fluids/acid_bucket.png" downloadURL="/assets/develop/fluids/acid_bucket_small.png">Texture</DownloadEntry>

> It's also recommended to add your mod's bucket to the `ConventionalItemTags.BUCKET` item tag so that other mods can handle it appropriately, either manually or through [data generation](../data-generation/tags).

Reviewer 3: It sounds more correct to me to add the tag instead of the bucket.

Reviewer 4: In practice, the reader has to add the item identifier to the tag values list. It might sound a bit odd out of context, but it is more accurate.

> It's also recommended to add your mod's bucket to the `ConventionalItemTags.BUCKET` item tag so that other mods can handle it appropriately, either manually or through [data generation](../data-generation/tags).

Reviewer: > either manually

~~is that explained anywhere in the docs? I couldn't find it easily~~ found it:

```suggestion
It's also recommended to add your mod's bucket to the `ConventionalItemTags.BUCKET` item tag so that other mods can handle it appropriately, either [manually](#tagging) or through [data generation](../data-generation/tags).
```

### Transparency and Textures {#transparency-and-textures}

> To add the texture for your fluid, you can use Fabric API's `FluidRenderHandlerRegistry`. Add the following lines to your `ClientModInitializer` to create a `SimpleFluidRenderHandler` that takes in two `Identifier`s for the still and flowing textures and an integer to tint it with.

Reviewer 3: "To add the texture for your fluid" sounds a little odd, consider "To add **a** texture **to** your fluid", or establish that requirement firmly

For simplicity, this demo uses the water texture `Identifier`s provided by Fabric API, but you can replace those with an `Identifier` that points to your own texture in the format `minecraft:block/water_still`.

> We'll also use the `BlockRenderLayerMap` to set the `ChunkSectionLayer` to transparent, so you can see through the fluid. For more information, see the docs on [Transparency and Tinting](../blocks/transparency-and-tinting).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To texture your fluid, you should use Fabric API's `FluidRenderHandlerRegistry`. We'll also use the `BlockRenderLayerMap` to set the `ChunkSectionLayer` to transparent, so you can see through the fluid. For more information, see the docs on [Transparency and Tinting](../blocks/transparency-and-tinting).

::: tip

For simplicity, this demo uses the water texture `Identifier`s provided by Fabric API, but you can replace those with an `Identifier` that points to your own texture in the format `minecraft:block/water_still`.

:::

Add the following lines to your `ClientModInitializer` to create a `SimpleFluidRenderHandler`, that takes in two `Identifier`s for the textures—one for the still source and one for the flowing fluid—and an integer for the color to tint it with.
```

@[code transcludeWith=:::fluid_texture](@/reference/latest/src/client/java/com/example/docs/appearance/ExampleModAppearanceClient.java)

> At this point, we have all we need to see the Acid ingame! You can use `setblock` or the Acid Bucket item to place acid in the world.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
At this point, we have all we need to see the Acid in-game! You can use `setblock` or the Acid Bucket item to place acid in the world.
```

![A screenshot of a green acid fluid in the world](/assets/develop/fluids/acid.png)

In the next chapter, we will add a fog effect when submerged in the fluid.

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> ## Adding Fog {#adding-fog}

Reviewer: I think this should be its own page `develop/fluids/fog`

> Fluids like water and lava change the fog when a player is submerged in them. This section of the tutorial will cover how to implement that for your fluid.

Reviewer 3: "how to implement that" sounds quite disconnected from the prior sentence

> As there is not an API for registering fog environments, we'll need to use a mixin to add our mod's fog type to the `FogType` enum. Add the following mixin to your main mixin package and to the `example-mod.mixins.json` mixin config.

Reviewer 3: Quite heavy usage of the word "mixin"

Reviewer: ```md
As there is not an API for registering fog environments, we'll need to use a mixin to add our mod's fog type to the `FogType` enum:

@ transclusion of the mixin

The class above should be placed in your main mixin package, and added to `example-mod.mixins.json`.
```

@[code transcludeWith=:::renderer](@/reference/latest/src/main/java/com/example/docs/mixin/FogTypeInvoker.java)

Now, we're able to create a class that will store our fog types.

@[code transcludeWith=:::type](@/reference/latest/src/main/java/com/example/docs/fog/ExampleModFogTypes.java)

### Fog Environments {#fog-environments}

> Let's start with creating a new fog environment. Fog environments are used to set where the fog should begin, where it should end, and what colour the fog should be when fully submerged in our fluid. Create an `AcidFogEnvironment` class in your client package with the following methods:

Reviewer 3: There is a mix of American and British English.

@[code transcludeWith=:::environment](@/reference/latest/src/client/java/com/example/docs/fog/client/AcidFogEnvironment.java)

> As there is not an API for registering fog environments, we'll need to use mixins to the two places where Minecraft's client is checking for fog types.

Reviewer 3: "mixins to the two places" also sounds weird, maybe "mixins into the two places"

First, we'll add our mod's fog environment to the `FogRenderer`. Add the following mixin to your client mixin package and to the `example-mod.client.mixins.json` mixin config.

@[code transcludeWith=:::renderer](@/reference/latest/src/client/java/com/example/docs/mixin/client/FogRendererMixin.java)

> First, we'll add our mod's fog environment to the `Camera`. Add the following mixin to your client mixin package and to the `example-mod.client.mixins.json` mixin config.

Reviewer 3: This is the second time this sentence structure has been used, which makes this bland to read. 
Additionally, the word "First" is used the second time as well.

@[code transcludeWith=:::renderer](@/reference/latest/src/client/java/com/example/docs/mixin/client/CameraMixin.java)

Be sure that all three mixins are added to their mixin configs, otherwise they will not be loaded.

Now, when we submerge ourselves in acid, the fog will change appropriately.

![A screenshot of a thick acidic green fog](/assets/develop/fluids/fog.png)

> ## Tagging Your Fluids {#tagging}

Reviewer: this should be moved above `#transparency-and-textures`

::: info

Users of [data generation](../data-generation/tags) may wish to register tags via `FabricTagProvider.FluidTagProvider`, rather than writing them by hand.

:::

> As a fluid is considered two seperate blocks in its flowing and still states, tags are often used to check for fluids. We'll create a fluid tag in `data/example-mod/tags/fluid/acid.json` with the following contents:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Because a fluid is considered two separate blocks in its flowing and still states, a tag is often used to check for both states together. We'll create a fluid tag in `data/example-mod/tags/fluid/acid.json`:
```

@[code transclude](@/reference/latest/src/main/generated/data/example-mod/tags/fluid/acid.json)

> Minecraft also uses fluid tags for behaviour. If you need your mod's fluid to behave like water (absorbed by sponges, swimmable, etc.), considering adding it to the `minecraft:water` fluid tag, and if you need it to behave like lava (swimmable by Striders/Ghasts, slows entities, etc.), consider adding it to the `minecraft:lava` tag. Note that if you only need a few things, you may wish to use mixins to change that behaviour yourself.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
::: tip

Minecraft also provider other tags to control the behavior of fluids:

- If you need your mod's fluid to behave like water (absorbed by sponges, swimmable...), considering adding it to the `minecraft:water` fluid tag
- If you need it to behave like lava (swimmable by Striders/Ghasts, slows entities...), consider adding it to the `minecraft:lava` fluid tag

If you only need *some* of those things, you may wish to use mixins to control the behavior finely.

:::
```

I think finely is the wrong word... something that means "control in detail"
Also, I acknowledge that behavior without a u looks weird. America :eagle: :hamburger: :us:

The fluid now has registered the source and the flowing fluid. We just need a bucket to complete the acid fluid, and a legacy block for it. Let's start with the legacy block. Go to the `ModBlocks` class. If you don't have one, follow [this](../blocks/first-block) tutorial.

@[code transcludeWith=:::7](@/reference/latest/src/main/java/com/example/docs/block/ModBlocks.java)

Now, let's add the bucket for acid. If you haven't created the class, called `ModItems`, follow [this](../items/first-item) tutorial.

@[code transcludeWith=:::acid_bucket](@/reference/latest/src/main/java/com/example/docs/item/ModItems.java)

Then, add this to the `AcidFluid` class:

@[code transcludeWith=:::bucket](@/reference/latest/src/main/java/com/example/docs/fluid/custom/AcidFluid.java)

To add the texture for your fluid, add this line to your `ClientModInitializer`:

@[code transcludeWith=:::fluid_texture](@/reference/latest/src/client/java/com/example/docs/appearance/ExampleModAppearanceClient.java)

In the next chapter, we will add effects for the fluid

## Adding Fluid Effects {#adding-fluid-effects}

Let's start with creating a new fog environment:

> @[code transcludeWith=:::1](@/reference/latest/src/client/java/com/example/docs/fluid/fog/ModFogEnvironment.java)

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
@[code transcludeWith=:::1](@/reference/latest/src/client/java/com/example/docs/fluid/fog/AcidFogEnvironment.java)
```

Reviewer 4: Haven't touched the docs at all, planning to fix up the markdown after merging some more stuf

Author: It's not only for the Acid, it's for every fluid

Reviewer 4: > It's not only for the Acid, it's for every fluid

It's similar for every fluid, but the color values and checks are specifically for acid. Vanilla has a separate fog environment for water and lava as well.
If someone wants to make a custom fluid, they can simply rename the class.
